Modelling and Recognition of the Linguistic Components in
American Sign Language
Liya Ding  and Aleix M. Martinez
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210
Liya Ding: dingl@ece.osu.edu; Aleix M. Martinez: aleix@ece.osu.edu
Abstract
The manual signs in sign languages are generated and interpreted using three basic building blocks:
handshape, motion, and place of articulation. When combined, these three components (together with
palm orientation) uniquely determine the meaning of the manual sign. This means that the use of
pattern recognition techniques that only employ a subset of these components is inappropriate for
interpreting the sign or to build automatic recognizers of the language. In this paper, we define an
algorithm to model these three basic components form a single video sequence of two-dimensional
pictures of a sign. Recognition of these three components are then combined to determine the class
of the signs in the videos. Experiments are performed on a database of (isolated) American Sign
Language (ASL) signs. The results demonstrate that, using semi-automatic detection, all three
components can be reliably recovered from two-dimensional video sequences, allowing for an
accurate representation and recognition of the signs.
Keywords
American Sign Language; handshape; motion reconstruction; multiple cue recognition; computer
vision
1 Introduction
Sign languages are used all over the world as a primary means of communication by deaf
people. American Sign Language (ASL) is one example, with broad uses in the United States.
According to current estimates, in the United States alone, it is used regularly by more than
500, 000 people, and up to 2 million use it from time to time. There is thus a great need for
systems that can interpret ASL (e.g., computer interfaces) or can serve as interpreters between
ASL and English (e.g., in hospitals).
As other sign languages, ASL has a manual component and a non-manual one (i.e., the face).
The manual sign is further divided into three components: i) handshape, ii) motion, and iii)
place of articulation (6;8;10;38;31;30)2. Most manual signs can only be distinguished when
all three components have been identified. An example is illustrated in Fig. 1. In this figure,
URL:  shttp://cbcsl.ece.ohio-state.edu/ (Liya Ding and Aleix M. Martinez).
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers
we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting
proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could
affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
2A fourth component can be included to this list: palm orientation. In this paper we do not directly model this, because, as we will show,
it can be obtained from the other three components.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
Published in final edited form as:
Image Vis Comput . 2009 November 1; 27(12): 1826±1844. doi:10.1016/j.imavis.2009.02.005.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
the words (more accurately called concepts3 or signs in ASL) “search” and “drink” share the
same handshape, but have different motion and place of articulation; “family” and “class” share
the same motion and place of articulation, but have a different handshape. Similarly, the
concepts “onion” and “apple” could only be distinguished by their place of articulation – one
near the eye region, the other at the chin.
If we are to build computers that can recognize ASL, it is imperative that we develop algorithms
that can identify these three components of the manual sign. In this paper, we present innovative
algorithms for obtaining the motion, handshape and place of articulation of the manual sign.
This is obtained from a single video sequence of the sign. By place of articulation  (POA), we
mean that we can identify the location of the hand with respect to the face and torso of the
signer. The motion  is given by the path travelled by the dominant hand from start to end of the
sign and by its rotation. The dominant hand is that which is used in single handed signs –
usually the right hand for right-handed people. As we will see later, some signs actually involve
the use of the two hands.
Finally, the handshape  is given by the linguistically significant fingers ( 6). In each ASL sign,
only a subset of fingers is actually of linguistic significance. While the position of the other
fingers is irrelevant, the linguistically significant fingers are the ones associated to meaning.
We address the issue as follows. First, we assume that while not all the fingers are visible in
the video sequence of a sign, those that are linguistically significant are (even if only for a short
period of time). This assumption is based on the observation that signers must provide the
necessary information to observers to make a sign unambiguous. Therefore, the significant
fingers ought to be visible at some point. With this assumption in place, we can use structure-
from-motion algorithms to recover the 3D structure and motion of the hand. To accomplish
this though, we need to define algorithms that are robust to occlusions. This is necessary
because although the significant fingers may be visible for some interval of time, these may
be occluded elsewhere. We thus need to extract as much information as possible from each
segment of our sequence. Here, we also assume that algorithms will soon be developed for the
detection or tracking of hand fiducials (e.g., knuckles). This is a very challenging task that has
challenged researchers in computer vision for quite some time. To show the state of the art in
this area, we develop a particle filter tracker. We will show that such a state-of-the-art approach
is able to successfully track a large number of knuckles, but not all. To properly test the
innovative algorithms presented in this paper, we will manually correct those fiducials that
cannot be successfully tracked. Further research should indeed be directed to this problem.
Once the three components of the sign described above are recovered, we can construct a
feature space to represent each sign. This will also allow us to do recognition in new video
sequences. Here, we will also assume that each of the ASL signs has been properly segmented
or appear in isolation. Combining signs into sentences would require the use of additional
motion information and of the non-manuals.
There are computer vision systems which only use a single feature for sign representation and
recognition ( 27;4;41;26;22;43 ). In several of these algorithms, the discriminant information is
generally searched within a feature space constructed with appearance-based features such as
images of pre-segmented hands (4), hand binary masks (29;1;11;43), and hand contours (34).
The other most typically used feature is motion (41;26). For recognition, one generally uses
Hidden Markov Models ( 34;29;1 ), neural networks ( 41) or multiple discriminant analysis ( 4).
These methods are limited to the identification of signs clearly separated by the single feature
3It is important to note that in ASL signs correspond to concepts not words. In many instances, more than one signed concept is needed
to represent a word. These are known as compound signs. This is the case, for example, when we want to sign the word “lawyer,” which
requires the concepts “law” and “person.”Ding and Martinez Page 2
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
in use. Hence, even though these systems are useful for the recognition of a few signs, they are
inappropriate as building blocks for the design of interfaces that can interpret and understand
a large number of ASL signs. If we are to design a system capable of understanding ASL, we
need to have a representation that uses the different components of the sign listed above. Also,
these methods may be sensitive to (or biased toward) outliers or noise in the training data
(44).
There are some existing linguistic-based algorithms for the recognition of signs. In general,
these methods extract certain features by means of a data-glove (35;16;21;36;5;32), some 2D
image segmentation algorithm to delineate the hand ( 18;2;5 ), or a 2D hand contour extraction
(33). Similar to the single feature-based sign recognition system defined above, Neuron
Network (35;32) or Hidden Markov Models (21;36;5) are used to classify each linguistic
component. After all the components are classified, they are combined together for the
classification of the signs using decision trees ( 16), dictionary lookups ( 33) or nearest neighbors
(35).
There are problems in these existing methods. First, only the systems using data-glove (35;
16;21;36;5;32) are capable of capturing the 3D positions information. Unfortunately, the use
of gloves limits the application of the algorithms greatly and they affect the psychological and
physical execution of the sign. Thus, the performed signs are not in their natural conditions
and most signers feel that these constraints greatly limits their communication channel. This
is the main reason why several authors have moved to vision (33;18). Unfortunately, in these
algorithms, the features used to classify the components are simple 2D features. With these 2D
features, the algorithms are very vulnerable to the inevitable self-occlusion of the hands, the
variability of the signers and the point of view of the sign.
In comparison to these existing algorithms, our approach reconstructs the 3D handshape and
the 3D motion of each sign in the signer's coordinate system from video sequences without the
need of a data-glove. Therefore, our algorithm can be used to model and recognize a much
larger amount of signs in a natural setting. In our approach, the 3D motion and place of
articulation of the signs are also identified. With these three main linguistic components of
ASL manual signs identified, our algorithm can provide robust recognition over a large variety
of signers and points of view.
Our first goal is to define a robust algorithm that can recover the handshape and motion
trajectory of each manual sign as well as their position with respect to the signer. In our
approach, we allow not only for self-occlusions but also for imprecise localizations of the
fiducial points. We restrict ourselves to the case where the handshape does not change from
start to end, because this represents a sufficiently large number of the concepts in ASL (31)
and allows us to use linear fitting algorithms. Derivations of our method are in Section 2.1.
The motion path of the hand can then be obtained using solutions to the three point resection
problem ( 14). Since these solutions are generally very sensitive to imprecisely localized feature
points, we introduced a robustified version that searches for the most stable computation.
Derivations for this method are in Section 2.2.
To recover the position of the hand with respect to the face, we make use of a recently proposed
face detection algorithm ( 9). We find the distance from the face to the camera as the maximum
distances travelled by the hand in all signs of that person. Using the perspective model, we
obtain the 3D position of the face using the camera coordinate system. Then, the 3D position
of the hand can be described using the face coordinate system, providing the necessary
information to discriminate signs (10;38;6). Derivations are in Section 2.3. In Section 3, we
detail on how each of these representations can be employed for the recognition of the sign.Ding and Martinez Page 3
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Experimental results are in Section 4, where we develop on the uses of the algorithms presented
in this paper.
2 Modelling the Three Components of the Manual Sign
In this section, we derive algorithms for recovering the 3D information necessary to uniquely
identify each sign.
2.1 Handshape reconstruction
First, we need to recover the 3D handshape of the signs in the video sequence. In our algorithm,
handshapes are defined by the 3D-world positions of a set of hand points (fiducials),
corresponding to the hand knuckles, finger tips and the wrist. Examples of the handshapes are
shown in Fig. 2.
We denote the set of all 3D-world hand points as Pe = [p1, …, pn], where pi = [xi, yi, zi]T
specifies the three dimensional coordinates of the ith feature point in the Euclidean coordinate
system. The image points in camera j are given by Qj = AjPe+bj, j = 1, 2, …, m, where Qj =
[qj1, …, qjn] is a matrix whose columns describe the image points, and Aj and bj are the
parameters of the jth affine camera.
Our goal here in handshape reconstruction is to recover Pe, with regard to the object (i.e., hand)
coordinate system, from known Qj, j = 1, 2, …, m.
The general approach to solve this kind of problems is to employ structure-from-motion
algorithms. However, in our application we need to use the model defined above to recover
the 3D shape even when not all the feature points are visible in all frames, i.e., with occlusions.
Hence, the general approach cannot be employed in our case. To resolve this problem we work
as follows.
First, we represent the set of affine equations defined above in a compact form as D = AP,
where
(1)
When there is neither noise nor missing data, D is of rank 4 or less, since it is the product of
A, a four column matrix, and P, which has 4 rows. If we consider a column vector of D as a
point in the ℝ2m space, all the points from D lie in a 4-dimensional subspace of ℝ2m. This
subspace, which is actually the column space of D, is denoted as 
 . If there was no missing
data or noise, any four linear independent columns of D would span 
 . Note that, in this case,
factorization algorithms (15) can be applied directly to obtain 
 .
When there is missing data in a column vector Di, any solution is possible. Hence, unless we
have some additional information, we need to find a mechanism to recover it. To resolve this
problem, we realize that the possible points in this column vector create an affine subspace,
denoted 
 i.
Let the four columns selection be Dh, Di, Dj, Dl, with h, i, j, l taking values in {1, 2, …, n},
and we enforce Dh ≠ Di ≠ Dj ≠ Dl. These four columns define the matrixDing and Martinez Page 4
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
where nf is the number of possible Fk, and we note that the maximum value of nf is 
 .
The four column vectors in Fk define four affine spaces 
 h, 
i, 
j, and 
 l. Let us then denote
the space spanned by the points from these four affine spaces 
 h, 
i, 
j and 
 l as
Since there are no identical columns in Fk, we know that
In the noise free case, the spaces defined by 
 k intersect, which means that 
  should be a subset
of the intersection of all these spaces,
Unfortunately, with localization errors (i.e., noise in the data matrix) as well as errors caused
by inaccurate affine modelling, 
  does not generally lie in every 
 k. This implies that, generally,
the intersection of all Sk is empty or of lower dimension than that needed to recover the structure
of the hand.
To resolve this problem, one can use the null-space technique of (19). In this approach, the
orthogonal space of 
 k is denoted as 
 . Let the matrix defining 
  be Nk. This allows us to
write
which is the matrix representation of 
⊥.
The null space of N is 
. Thus, computing the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) of N =
UWVT and taking the four singular vectors ( u1, u2, u3, u4) in U associated to the four smallest
singular values, we obtain the spanning space 
 . In fact, this is the closest solution as given by
the Frobenius norm.
Once 
  has been properly estimated, we can use the non-missing elements of each column in
D to fill in the missing positions of the data matrix. This is readily achieved as a linear
combination of u1, u2, u3 and u4.
Note that in the approach described thus far, we use all possible Fk to construct N. This approach
works best when there is no noise in the original data matrix. In general though, the data matrix
has an unknown additive noise term. Ideally, we would like to use only those subsets that areDing and Martinez Page 5
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
less affected by this additive noise term. The problem is that in the absence of prior knowledge
(which is our case), there is no mechanism to know which submatrices carry more noise than
others. A solution to this problem is to select the submatrices based on their sensitivity to noise.
A recent result ( 20) shows that the submatrices with most distinct column vectors are precisely
those less affected by the additive noise term. In ( 20), a Deviation Parameter (DP) criterion is
defined to measure the effects of noise in each submatrix. This DP value gives a measure of
the sensitivity of a matrix to perturbation due to additive Gaussian noise. A large DP value for
Fk means this submatrix is more vulnerable to noise. Missing elements also increase the DP
value. Using this criterion, all Fk can be sorted in ascending order of relevance.
The next question we need to address is how many submatrices Fk are necessary to recover
the 3D shape of the hand. Note that the DP criterion sorts the submatrices according to how
noise affects them, but we still require to select the first r of these. To achieve this, we compute
the error between the fitted matrix (i.e., our result) and the data matrix. In this process, only
the visible elements of the matrix are compared by means of the Frobenius norm. Each possible
value of r yields an error Er. The D̂ providing the minimum of these differences is selected as
the solution. With D̂ computed, it is easy to decompose it into the (affine) shape P̂ and motion
Â using factorization.
As noted above, P̂ represents the affine  shape of the hand. We also know that two affine shapes
are equivalent if there exists an affine transformation between them. To break this ambiguity,
we need to include the Euclidean constraints in our equations. Assuming the orthographic
model of a camera, we can resolve the above problem by finding that 
  which
makes [ Âj b̂j] H equal to the Euclidean model (with obvious notation). Orthographic cameras
will be equivalent to the Euclidean space when the following constraints hold,
(2)
where 
  and 
  are the first and second rows of Âj, and 
 . Eq. (2) is a linear system
for the symmetric matrix 
 . We can then recover 
  as follows. First we initialize 
  using the
Cholesky decomposition as 
 . Second, we use the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm for
nonlinear fitting to find the best local solution (7).
The Euclidean shape of our object is then given by P̃ = H−1P. Fig. 2 shows example results
for the recovery of the 3D handshapes “1,” “3,” “5,” “8,” “F,” “K,” “A,” “I,” “L” and “W.”
Note that these signs correspond to the handshapes only, and do not have any meaning by
themselves – unless they are combined with a motion and place of articulation.
If a column in D has a large number of missing elements, we may very well be unable to recover
any 3D information from it. Note, however, that this can only happen when one of the fingers
is occluded during the entire sequence, in which case, we will assume that this finger is not
linguistically significant . This means we do not need to recover its 3D shape, because this will
be irrelevant for the analysis and understanding of the sign. As argued above, this is a grounded
hypothesis, because if a linguistically significant finger is not visible, the sign will either be
ambiguous or meaningless.Ding and Martinez Page 6
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
2.2 Motion Reconstruction
We can now recover the 3D motion path of the hand by finding the pose difference between
each pair of consecutive frames. That means, we need to estimate the translation and rotation
made by the object from frame to frame using the camera coordinate system. A typical solution
to this problem is given by the PNP resection problem ( 14). Also, in this case, the appropriate
model to use is perspective projection, because we are interested in small changes.
In the three point perspective pose estimation problem, we employ three object points, p1,
p2, and p3, with coordinates pi = [xi, yi, zi]T. Our goal is to recover these values for each of the
points. Since the 3D shape of the object has already been recovered, the interpoint distances,
i.e., namely a = ‖p2 − p1‖, b = ‖p1 − p3‖, and c = ‖p3 − p2‖, can be easily calculated.
As it is well-known, the perspective model is given by
(3)
where qi = (ui, vi)T is the ith image point and f is the focal length of the camera. The object is
in the direction specified by the following unit vector
Now, the task reduces to finding those scalers, s1, s2 and s3, such that pi = siwi. The angles
between these unit vectors can be calculated as
(4)
Grunert's solution to this problem (13), is based on the assumption that s2 = μs1 and s3 = νs1,
which allows us to reduce the three point resection problem to a fourth order polynomial of
ν:
(5)
where the coefficients A4, A3, A2, A1 and A0 are functions of interpoint distances a, b, c and
the angles α, β, γ between all wi (14).
Such polynomials are known to have zero, two or four real roots. With each real root from (5),
we can calculate μ, s1, s2, s3 and the values of p1, p2 and p3. Then, to recover the translation
and rotation of the hand points, we use the nine equations given by
(6)Ding and Martinez Page 7
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
where wpi is a hand point as given by the world coordinate system, and R and t = [tx, ty, tz]T
are the rotation matrix and translation vector we need to recover.
The nine entries of the rotation matrix are not independent. To reduce the 12 parameters to
nine, we use a two-step method. 1) First, we note that the three points being used in the resection
algorithm define a plane. We can now move and rotate this plane to match that of the x-y plane
of the camera coordinate system. This rotation, R1, is given by the norm of the vectors defining
the plane. Combined with the translation, t1, needed to position the plane at the origin of the
coordinate system, we have
Here, we also have 
 , i = 1, 2, 3. 2) In our second step, we use linear methods to solve the
system of equations. Substituting wpi for p′i in (6), yields
Now denote the three columns of R2 r1, r2 and r3, and recall that r3 = r1 × r2. Furthermore,
since 
 , the three entries in r3 can be eliminated. This then becomes an easy to solve linear
system of 9 unknowns and 9 equations, followed by a simple cross product to obtain the final
solution.
The result of the two-step procedure described above results in the following transformation
With analogy to (6), we have
To make things easier to work with, we parameterize the rotation matrix using the three rotation
angles rx, ry, and rz, as
(7)
Using this parametrization, the object is first rotated about the z-axis (in a clockwise direction
when looking towards the origin) for angle rz, then about the y-axis ( ry) and finally about the
x-axis ( rx). We also note that for each R recovered, depending on the free choice of the signDing and Martinez Page 8
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
of cos ry, we have two sets of parameters: ( rx, ry, rz) and ( rx + π, π − ry, rz + π). Since these
two solutions correspond to the same rotation, we only need to consider one of them. In the
following, and without loss of generality, we will assume that the positive solution is the correct
one.
The procedure described above provides a solution up to a sign ambiguity in the z direction.
Note that aligning the plane defined by our triple with the x-y-plane implies z = 0. Hence there
are two solutions for R. One is given by a negative z direction, i.e., the Normal of the plane
pointing toward the negative quadrant. The other solution points toward the positive quadrant.
This ambiguity will need to be considered in our derivations below.
Recall that the handshapes we work with are constant from beginning to end of each sign. This
means that the rotations and translations obtained using the method described above for each
of the possible triplets have to be the same. However, the polynomial defined in ( 5) may have
more than one root and, in general, it is not known which of these roots correspond to the
solution of our problem . To resolve this problem, we calculate all the solutions given by all
possible triplets, and use a voting method to find the best solution.
In this approach, each solution for R is represented in a three-dimensional space defined by
rx, ry and rz, i.e., each solution is a point (vector) in this 3D space. Once we have calculated
the solutions of each triplet, we need to determine which of them is the best solution. To this
end, we use a Parzen window approach, where a circular window of radius T is centered at the
location of each vector. Then, the number of solutions (votes) in each of these Parzen windows
is calculated. The final solution is defined as the mean of all the sample vectors within the
window with most votes.
More formally, let us define the rotation obtained with the kth triplet as rk, and the window of
radius T centered at rk as Nk. The number V (rk) of sample solutions found within each Nk is
and ns is the total number of triplets. Then, the most voted solution is given by
The same algorithms can be used to obtain a solution for t, yielding t̂. Note that in almost all
voting methods, the determination of the best window width (2 T in our algorithm) is very
difficult even when we can assume that we know the distribution of the variable to be voted.
In our algorithm, we use T = 10. This value is determined because that 2 T (= 20) is about
 of the total ranges of the variables.
The results above allow us to obtain the final estimates of the rotation and translation. These
are given by the means of all the samples in V (r̂) and V (t^). Note that in the process described
above, the voting was used to eliminate the outliers from the solutions of Grunert's polynomials
and the mean to provide an estimate based on the remaining inliers. This procedure is generally
more robust than Grunert's solution.Ding and Martinez Page 9
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
To show that our method can cope better with localization errors than the classical algorithm
proposed by Grunert, we now provide some statistical analysis. For this purpose, we
constructed synthetic handshapes with known motion parameters. Noise evenly distributed
over [−n, n] (in pixels), with n = 1, 2, 3, 4, is added to the image points locations in both the
horizontal and vertical axes. Error rates of our method and of the mean to the solutions of
Gurnerts's algorithm are given in Fig. 3.
2.3 Place of articulation
To successfully represent the 3D handshape and motion recovered using the above presented
algorithms, we need to be able to describe these with respect to the signer not the camera. For
this, we can set the face as a frame of reference. This is appropriate because the face provides
a large amount of information and serves as the main center of attention ( 25). For example, the
sign “father” is articulated using handshape “5” (as shown in Fig. 2 (c)), and with a forward-
backward motion at the forehead (i.e., the thumb tapping the forehead). This is an easy sign to
recognize, because there is a single meaning associated to it. However, the same sign signed
at the chin means “mother.” Therefore, the same handshape and motion can have differen
meanings when this is signed at different locations. Perhaps most interestingly, there are signs
that modify their interpretation (or utility) with regard to where they are signed. For example,
the concept “hurt” has distinct meanings depending on the place of articulation. When signed
around the forehead, it means “headache,” but if signed around the stomach area it means
“stomachache.” This means that to correctly interpret every concept (sign) in ASL, one needs
to model its place of articulation too.
A convenient reference point to use is the face, because this can be readily and reliably detected
using computer vision algorithms. In particular, we will use the center of the face as the origin
of the 3D space, and describe the place of articulation with regard to this origin. Without loss
of generality, we can further assume the face defines the x-y plane of our 3D representation
and, hence, the location of the face also provides the direction of the x, y and z axes of our 3D
coordinate system.
To properly define the face coordinate system just described, we employed a recently proposed
face detection algorithm ( 9). In sign language, the hand often touches or comes across the face,
which causes imprecise detection or miss-detections of the face. Given that the motion of the
head is generally small during a sign, a Gaussian models can be utilized to fit the results. Let
ft = [x, y, r ]T, where [ x, y] is the detected face center, r the radius, and t the frame number. We
now fit a Gaussian model over the face detection in all frames, N(μf, Σf), with μf = (μx, μy,
μr)T the mean and Σf = diag[σx, σy, σr] the variances. If several faces are detected in each image,
they can be described as fti = [xti, yti, rti]T. The Mahalanobis distance
provides a simple measure of detection accuracy. Outliers can then be detected as those having
distances larger than 1. The rest of the detections are considered inliers. From the inlier
detections fti, the final detection ft in frame t is chosen as the one with smallest dti value. If
there is no inlier detection in a frame, the location of the missed face is estimated using a linear
interpolation of the neighboring frames. This robust face detection in video enables us to use
a face model to partition the face into linguistically useful facial regions. This face model,
which includes estimated locations of the principal internal facial features has been learned
from sample face. Examples of this face detection procedure are shown in Fig. 4.Ding and Martinez Page 10
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
In our data-set, extracted from (23), the signing person stands in a fixed position. For each
signer, we can define the distance from the signer to the camera as the maximum distance
between the hand and the camera in all video sequences. However, simply taking the maximum
distance as above makes it sensitive to outliers due to a single or a couple of inaccurately
recovered motions. To resolve this issue, we employ the distance from the face of a signer to
the camera, Zf, using a “modified maximum” defined as follows. We denote the maximum
distance between the hand and the camera in the ith video sequences as 
 , i = 1, …, m. Since
the changes in 
  are relatively small when compared to the distance between the face and the
camera, we assume that Df can be modelled using a Gaussian model 
 . If there is
any 
 , j = 1, …, m, satisfying 
 , 
 is considered an outlier and eliminated.
The maximum of the remaining 
  is taken as the value of Zf.
Once the face center [ uf, vf]T, the radius rf and the distance from the face to the camera Zf have
been computed, we calculate the position of the center of the face [ Xf, Yf, Zf] in the camera
coordinate system from 
  and 
 . We then define the x-y plane to be that provided
by the face. Here, we assume that the face is planar, because we are only concerned with the
main plane defined by the frontal view of the face. Whenever the face is frontal, there will only
be a translation between the camera coordinate system and that of the face, i.e., Pf = Pc − [Xf,
Yf, Zf]T. This is the most common case in our examples, since the subjects in (23) were asked
to signed while looking at the camera. Using this approach, we can define the place of
articulation with respect to the subjects' coordinate system.
Using the approach derived in Sections 2.1-2.2, we recover the 3D handshape and the 3D
motion parameters. These are now described with respect to the place of articulation obtained
from the method described in this section to uniquely represent the sign. Two examples of this
complete modelling are in Fig. 5.
3 Recognition of ASL Signs
Thus far, we have presented an approach to describe an ASL manual sign using its three basic
building blocks – handshape, motion and place of articulation. We will now introduce
algorithms that use this representation to do recognition of ASL signs. We will also illustrate
how the proposed approach can distinguish between very similar signs, i.e., signs that only
diverge in one of these three components.
3.1 Handshape Recognition
The handshape model defined in Section 2.1 provides information of the spatial location of
each of the hand knuckles, the tip of each finger and the wrist. Since each pair of consecutive
points defines an underlying bone, our representation also includes information of the angle
between these segments.
This spatial representation of the handshapes provides a simple mechanism for comparison.
For this, the feature points need to be normalized by position and scale. Shift invariance is
given by centering the mean of the hand points at the origin. The handshape is then scaled to
have unit spectral norm. After normalization, least-squares (LS) is used to find the affine
transformation between each pair of handshapes. Let P1 and P2 be a pair of handshapes after
normalization, solving for 
  and 
provides the least-squares solutions, where Pi ∈ ℝ3×20 are the twenty feature points describingDing and Martinez Page 11
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
the handshape, 4 as shown in Fig. 6, and Tj ∈ ℝ3×3 is an affine transformation. We take the
mean of the two residuals as the error of our fitting process,
where 
  is the 2-norm of a matrix.
The equation defined in the preceding paragraph is solely concerned with the spatial location
of the feature points. Nonetheless, a handshape is also defined by the angles between different
segments. Hence, it is necessary to incorporate this information in our formulation. Fig. 6 shows
the different angles that we will use to compare two handshapes. In (a) we label the nine joint
angles employed by our algorithm, and in (b) the angle difference between neighboring fingers.
We describe these 13 angles of Pi in a vector as Θi = π−1(θ1, …, θ13)T. The comparison of the
angle is
where 
  is the 2-norm of a vector.
The two measures described above, Eshape and Eangle, provide a comparison of the handshapes
using the spatial data and the angle differences. However, while some of these features are
visible for a large number of frames in each video sequence, others are only visible in a very
small interval. Since the algorithm introduced in Section 2 generally gains precision as more
sample images become available, it is costumary to weight each of the features according to
the number of times they are visible in the video sequence. This point is related to the
“linguistically significant” fingers described earlier. In general the linguistically significant
fingers will be visible for most of the duration of the video sequence, because these are the
ones that carry the meaning. Again, this suggests a penalty term on the less relevant
information. The visibility Vij of the jth point in handshape Pi is defined as
where pij is the jth point in handshape Pi. Note that the number of frames where pij is visible
can be readily calculated during the (manual or automatic) detection process.
This new measurement allows us to write the vector of visibility vi = (Vi1, …, Vi20)T. The
visibility difference between two handshapes is given by
4In this LS fitting process, we only employ the common visible data of both handshapes. In some cases this results in a smaller number
of columns.Ding and Martinez Page 12
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Note that the range of values taken by each of the error measurements defined above is [0, 1].
This suggest a simple combination of the three errors as
(8)
Finally, for recognition purposes, a new test handshape P is classified as having the same
meaning (class) as that Pi with smallest value for (8). More formally, let Pck be the kth sample
of handshape c. Then, the handshape label h of P is given by
3.2 Motion Recognition
Motion is not only one of the basic elements of a sign without which recognition is not possible,
it also carries additional information such as stress and other prosodic cues (40). The motion
representation described in Section 2.2 is appropriate for these tasks. In this section, we show
how it can also be used to do recognition of a set of basic ASL motions.
Most ASL signs include one or more of the following nine motion patterns: “up,” “down,”
“left,” “right,” “forward,” “backward,” “circle,” “tapping”/“shake,” and “rotation.” To this list,
we should include a tenth class which we will refer to as “none.” This final class specifies a
sign with no associated motion (stationary).
To accurately detect each of these motions using the representation presented in Section 2.2,
we need to determine the beginning and end of the sign. These are generally given by two
known cues – the zero-crossings of the velocity curve and eye blinks. In some instances these
could be difficult to determine. Additional features have to be considered when signs are signed
in varying contexts (42) and research on discovering these features is an important area in
linguistics.
To do recognition, we employ the translation vectors and the rotation matrices describing the
motion from frame to frame. Before these are combined to describe the motion trajectory (path)
of the sign, we need to eliminate the noise term. To do this we fit polynomial functions to the
sequence of translation vectors we recovered. The degree of the polynomial is defined
proportional to the number of frames used to estimate the motion trajectory.
For a sign of m frames, the recovered translation (after polynomial fitting) and rotation angles
in the ith frame in the sequence are denoted 
  and 
 , respectively. The
rotation matrix Ri describes the rotation between the hand and camera coordinate systems,
which is given by (7). The rotation between frame i and i + 1 is then given by 
 .
The rotation between any two frames 
  can now be parameterized using the three angles
, 
 and 
 , as we did in (7). The translation between frames i and i + 1 is readily given by
.
The process described above provides the translation and rotation information needed to define
the path traveled by the hand. To properly define this, letDing and Martinez Page 13
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
be the vector defining the translation and rotation made by the hand from frame i to frame i +
1.
Since we are not studying the prosody of the sign, we can eliminate the scaling factor in gj.
This is in fact necessary to do classification of the motion regardless of other factors such as
stress and intonation (40;39). An exception is done to disambiguate the small movements of
“tapping” and “shake” from the larger ones of “forward-backward” and “right-left.” An
example, is the concept “father,” which uses tapping, and “interview,” which generally
involves one or more forward-backward motions.
The translation between consecutive frames 
  is used for recognizing the direction
of movement. To be considered a valid detection, the translation ought to be larger than a
minimum value Tν. On the strength aspect, a valid directed motion needs to be larger than the
percentage Tνs of the total strength. If the signer is left-handed, the 3D motion will be mirrored
in the x-axis. Note that in our system, we decompose diagonal motion into the motions in the
x-axis, y-axis or z-axis. For example, for the diagonal motion “left and down”, both “left”
motion and “down” motion are detected. In other words, we do not distinguish “left and down”
from “left then down.”
Rotation is detected in the same manner. To be considered a real rotation, its velocity, given
by the sum of the rotation angles 
 , needs to be larger than a pre-specified threshold
TR. Again, the strength of the total rotation angles should be larger than TRs to be considered
a valid rotation.
Circular motions are trickier to detect and require of additional attention. To properly detect
these, a nested mechanism is constructed. First we obtain a 3D trajectory 
 , j = 1,
…, ng, which is the result of a dense sampling from the polynomial fitted to the original
trajectory 
 , i = 1, …, m. Note that the larger the number ng is, the denser the sampling,
which leads to a higher frame rate. Here, we use ng = 3m, since this corresponds to a frame
rate of 90 frames per second, which is generally a good choice for circle motion detection.
Since circles are signed as approximated 2D curves, we project the 3D trajectory onto several
2D planes. In the first step of the process, we consider four 2D projections, given by the x-y
plane, the x-z plane, the y-z plane, and the plane defined by the first two principle components
of the 3D points defining the curve. These four options consider a variety of commonly signed
circular motions in ASL. Most use the first three choices – a rotation parallel to one of the
planes defined by the signer's coordinate system. However, in some cases, and especially when
the signer and observer (camera) are not in front of one another, the rotation needs to be defined
according to the principal components of the motion. This option is slightly more sensitive to
noise, but, because of the reasons cited here, it needs to be considered.
For each of the four 2D planes defined in the preceding paragraph, we have the projected 2D
curve defined by the points 
 , j = 1, …, ng. The ranges of the two directions are calculated
and we denote the smaller one as D1 and the other as D2. In this 2D space, the points on the
curves are densely sampled followed by the computation of the Hough transform for circles
with radius rc. The range of the possible radius rc value to be tested is taken from D1/4 to
D2/2. This is because the circles with radius smaller than D1/4 are too small to be valid circluarDing and Martinez Page 14
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
motions, and it is impossible to have a circle with its radius larger than D2/2 in this 2D curve
space. The circle parameter ( xc, yc) is voted for each rc. If the maximum vote is less than Tc,
no circle is detected for this radius. Since the Hough transform will also give high votes for
arcs, we need to check if the circle is complete. The angles Θi are calculated as the angles of
the line connecting the points 
  on the curve with the voted circle center ( xc, yc). A
continuous description Θ is obtained by filling in the gaps between consecutive points.
The regions of Θ can now be used to study the behavior of the hand. If in a region of Θ, there
is a continuous interval [ j1, j2] with changes of the sort 2 π ∼ 2.2π, a circular motion may be
present. To properly detect this, we move to the second step of our process. Here, the 3D points
, j = j1, …, j2, are put through a Hough transforms analysis using the 2D points on
the plane defined by the first two principle components of the 3D points with radius [ rc − 3 ∼
rc + 3]. Note that only the 2D projected values are used, because, for the points in this interval
to form a circle, they should lie on a plane. Similar to the above, the monotonicity of the angle
is computed. Since the distances of the points to the circle center should be identical for circles,
we require the distances in this interval to be closer to the radius and to have variances less
than Tr. Here, Tr is set to (0.2 rc)2, which is almost equivalent to allowing a 30% difference of
the distances with respect to the radius. When an interval [ j1, j2] satisfies these conditions, a
circle with radius rc is detected. Fig. 7 shows an example detection of a circle defined in the
x-z plane.
Note that in the above defined circle detection procedure, the direction of motion is ignored.
This information is still present in the spatial information of gi. Note also that if a circle in the
original 3D trajectory is mostly in the x-y plane, the x-z plane or the y-z plane, it is usually
detected both in this plane and the 2D plane of the principle components with very similar
radices. Since we are only interested in the existence of the circle motion, this will be treated
as a single circular motion.
When a sign trajectory corresponds to a small motion, as in tapping and shaking, the motion
detector defined in the preceding paragraphs will not generally detect them. Instead, these will
be considered small components of the noise term. If we are to detect these motions robustly,
we need to define a second set of thresholds whose sole purpose is to detect small motion
patterns. For this task, the thresholds defined above are reduced to half of their value. The same
motion extraction algorithm is then used to determine the existence of small components in
the motion pattern. If such a small motion is detected we classified it as “tapping” whenever
this involves movements about two opposite directions, and as “shaking” whenever there is a
rotation involved. All other cases are classified as “none.”
Figs. 8 and 9 show seven examples of motion detection obtained from actual ASL signs. Recall
that many ASL concepts are signed using a sequence of two or more of the motion classes
described in this section. The algorithm described above will detect the beginning and end of
each of these. Two examples are given in Fig. 10. The first example corresponds to the motion
of the sign “legal,” which includes a left followed by a down motion. The sign “forever” is
signed with a right then forward motion.
Before we finish this section, it is worth mentioning that the motion recognition described in
this section is invariant not only to the size of the sign, but also to the number of repetitions
and length of the sign. This will prove very useful when recognizing signs from different
subjects.Ding and Martinez Page 15
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
3.3 Detection of the place of articulation
In our modelling of ASL signs described in Section 2, the place of articulation is given with
respect to the center of the face. To properly define the location of the hand, we use the hand
fiducial that is closest to the face. The position of this fiducial with respect to the coordinate
system of the face defines the POA (place of articulation) of the sign.
In some signs, the POA is not used to disambiguate signs but to define a specific location or
meaning. For example, in the sign “you” or “she,” we point to the appropriate person. These
signs generally happen away from the face. Thus, all the signs that are not close or around the
face area will not be assigned any POA, and we label them with “none.”
As mentioned earlier, the face is detected using a recently proposed algorithm ( 9), which also
provides an estimate of the size (radius) of the face. The face area is divided into eight regions,
Fig. 11. Each of these divisions is necessary to distinguish between several signs. For example,
the forehead region (labeled “1” in Fig. 11) is used for paternal signs such as “father” and
“boy,” while the chin region (labeled 6 in the figure) is related to maternal signs such as
“mother” and “girl.”
The template of the eight divisions shown in Fig. 11 is obtained from a set of manually marked
images. Once the template is learned, it is used to estimate the location of these regions in every
image in our ASL sequences.
When the POA is an “inherent feature,” that is, when the position does not change during the
duration of the sign, the POA is that position. When the POA is a “prosodic feature,” that is,
when it changes during the formation of the sign, we choose the position of the starting point
or the ending position of the sign, whichever is closest to the face. The POA positions are then
labeled with one of the eight classes shown in Fig. 11. The label is assigned according to the
region that is closest to the POA. Fig. 12, shows a few examples of this process.
There are many signs that share a common handshapes but have different places of articulation.
This is illustrated in Fig. 13. In the first example of this figure, the sign “car” is signed in front
of the torso (far from the face), while the sign “lousy” occurs with the thumb touching the nose
tip. In the second example, the sign“water” is signed with the tip of the index finger touching
the chin, while “Wednesday” is signed on a side.
3.4 Using the three components for recognition
The first reason why one needs to model the three basic components of a sign (handshape,
motion, and place of articulation) is because the three are needed to uniquely identify each
possible sign.
A second important reason is because it allows for the recognition of previously unseen signs.
Note that it only takes a sample of each handshape to be able to represent each possible sign
that uses it. The other, unseen signs are given by the motion classes we have defined and every
possible POA. For example, the sign “mother” is not present in the dataset of ( 23) that we will
be using for testing. Nonetheless, the sign “father,” which is in the database, uses the same
handshape and motion as “mother”. The only difference is that while father is signed on the
forehead (area 1 in our model), mother is signed on the chin (area 6). If we are to recognize
the concept “mother,” all we need to know is that it is the same as father but with a different
POA; we do not actually need to provide a video sequence with the sign or train any classifier.
This is a key advantage of the proposed system. It means that our system can be trained with
a small number of signs. Additional concepts (or word) can be added from a dictionary, e.g.,
(31).Ding and Martinez Page 16
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
To be able to do this type of recognition, we propose to combine the information we have from
each signed concept in a tree-like structure. In this approach, all the training samples are used
to obtained the 3D reconstruction of the hands. Each training sample is labeled with the
meaning (concept label) and type of handshape. For example, if we have the sign “legal” as a
sample video, which is signed with a “L” handshape, we will give it two labels: “legal” and
“L,” specifying the meaning and type of handshape. This training sample is used to learn  that
“legal” is signed with handshape “L” and a left-down motion. We can now teach  the system
that the concept “library” is signed with a “L” handshape and a circular motion, without the
need to provide any sample video – much like ASL is taught in the classroom. The system is
now ready to recognize these two ASL signs.
Our tree structure works as follows. Handshapes are used at the first level of the tree structure.
For each learned handshape, we add as many branches as needed to represent all the concepts
that the system has in memory. As we have seen, many signs have identical handshape and
motion but are signed in a different POA. If this is the case, we add a third level in our hierarchy
to specify the different POAs needed to make the distinction.
Note that one could also design a tree structure that starts with POAs or motion categories at
the first level and then employ the other two components in the second and third levels of the
hierarchy. Here, we chose to use the handshapes in the first level because of the structure of
the dataset we are going to use as in Section 4. In fact, the tree structure should always be fitted
to the vocabulary of the signs in use. And it needs to be adjusted when new signs are added
into the vocabulary as we will show later. On the other hand, the easy adjustment of this tree
structure is the only thing that is required when new signs are added. No additional training is
needed. Also note that if hand orientation is needed to distinguish signs in the vocabulary, one
can add another level for this component in the tree structure conveniently.
As a final note, one could design a system which does not require of any training video
sequence. The handshape could be provided by an interactive tool that allow the user to work
with a hand model similar to that depicted in Fig. 6. The system could then be entirely trained
with labels, without the need to collect any large database of signs. This would however require
of expertise users to train the system. The advantage of using a training video to learn the 3D
handshape, is that we do not need to provide any 3D model of it since the system will learn
this by itself.
4 Experimental Results
To obtain our results we employ the video sequences of the Purdue ASL Database ( 23), which
include challenging sets of ASL signs using a variety of handshapes, motions and POA. The
database contains 2, 576 video sequences. The resolution of the videos is 640 × 480 pixels with
the hand size varying from a minimum of (approximately) 55×55 to a maximum of
(approximately) 140 × 140 pixels. The size of the face in the video sequences varies from 110
× 110 to 160 × 160 pixels.
The first set of the video sequences in the Purdue ASL set include a large number of basic
handshapes. This corresponds to a set of video clips in which each person signs two ASL
concepts with distinct meanings. Each sign is given by a common handshape but distinct motion
and/or POA. Therefore, these video sequences provide an adequate testing ground for the
proposed system. Since these ASL sequences do not include different palm hand orientation,
we have not included this in our model. Nonetheless, this can be readily added, because the
palm orientation is directly given by the 3D reconstruction and the reference coordinates as
given by the face location.Ding and Martinez Page 17
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
In our experiments, we used the video sequences of 10 different subjects. Each subject
performed 38 distinct signs. Since each handshape is shared by two different signs, there is a
total of 19 different handshapes. The handshapes and the corresponding signs are shown in
Table. 1.
In general, it is very difficult to accurately track the knuckles of the hand fully automatically.
This is mainly due to the limited image resolution, inevitable self-occlusions and the lack of
salient characteristics present in the video sequences. Progress is being made toward automatic
detections, but current existing algorithms require high quality images and slow motions of
the hands ( 12;37 ), which are not usually the case in ASL video sequences. Since our goal is to
test the performance of the algorithms presented in this paper, not that of an automatic hand
tracker, we use a semi-automatic hand point tracking algorithm to obtain the positions of the
visible hand points in the image sequences of each sign.
This semi-automatic tracking algorithm works as follows. To begin with, the positions of the
visible hand points (in the first frame of the sign) in each video sequence are manually marked.
The rest of the hand points are labelled as occluded fiducials. Then, a tracker based on the idea
of the Sampling Importance Resampling (SIR) particle filter ( 3) is employed to follow the 2D
image movements of each of the hand fiducials. In our implementation, appearance and
geometrical features of the hand points are used to estimate the weights of the particles. The
appearance features used include the cropped images of the visible hand points, while the
geometrical features employed the lengths of finger segments and the angles separating them.
After the automatic tracking results are obtained, they are shown to the user. In this way, the
user can correct any inaccuracies of the tracker and can mark those points that had just become
visible. Similarly, newly occluded hand points can be labelled as such. After the tracking has
been corrected or verified by the user, the particle filter provides the detection result for the
next frame. This process is iterated until we have accounted for all the frames in the video
sequence.
The above defined tracking algorithm is applied to the ASL video sequences used in our
experiment. The trackings obtained with this algorithm are almost always correct, except when
there are occlusions or large changes between consecutive frames. During our experiments,
about 28% of the automatically tracked hand points had to be manually corrected. We can
conclude that this tracking algorithm greatly reduces the work load that would be required by
manual marking, but that additional research is needed in this area before we can successfully
resolve the problem of fully automatic recognition of ASL signs.
For each of the 380 video sequences, the 3D handshape is reconstructed from the tracked hand
point positions using the algorithm presented in Section 2.1. Having the 3D handshape, the
motion parameters associated to each of the frames are recovered using the method described
in Section 2.2. The POA is given by the algorithm defined in Section 3.3.
Our first experiment is intended to test the validity of the recovered 3D handshape. Note that
the remaining system is based on this and, hence, a poor reconstruction could lead to later
problems. For this experiment, we chose the sequences of 3 subjects as the training set, while
using the rest of the sequences belonging to the remaining 7 subjects as the testing set. All
possible 120 combinations of this 3-fold cross-validation test are employed. A handshape is
correctly recognized if the class label obtained by the recognition algorithm is the same as the
true label. The final recognition results are defined as the total number of correct recognitions
over the total number of test sequences. The recognition rate is 100%.
This result shows that our algorithm provides robust reconstruction of the 3D handshapes,
although the detection and tracking of the hand fiducials contains noise and large occlusions.
Especially amongst the 19 handshapes in our experiments there are several similar handshapes.Ding and Martinez Page 18
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
For example, the handshapes “U” and “R” are very similar. The only slight difference between
them are the positioning of the index finger and the middle finger. In handshape “U,” the index
finger and the middle finger go together – straight and parallel to each other. In handshape “R,”
the two fingers are slightly crossed, as shown in Fig. 14. An excellent 3D reconstruction is
needed to be able to disambiguate the two. Our system achieves this thanks to the multiple
features encoded into the system – including spatial information and angles.
Now that we know that the handshape representation and recognition system used provide an
adequate bases to distinguish between a large variety of signs, we would like to see how well
these results combine with the motion features obtained by our system. In our second
experiment, the signs with the same handshape and motion are considered identical. The goal
of this experiment is to determine whether the system can disambiguate signs regardless of
their POA. For example, the concept “father” and “tree” have the same handshape and motion
patterns (as given by our representation, since shake and tap are classified in the same class).
Nonetheless, these need to be distinguished from the other signs having a common handshape
but a distinct motion. Using the same cross-validation procedure described above, we randomly
chose the video sequences of 3 subjects for training, and use the rest for testing. The recognition
rate is 95.5%.
The third experiment will test the accuracy of our system in classifying ASL signs from
different subjects when using the three basic components of the manual sign. Hence, in this
experiment, the goal is to determine the true underlying meaning of each sign. This means, we
are now required to correctly discriminate the three basic components of the sign – its
handshape, motion and POA. This is thus the most challenging of the experiments. Using the
same 3-fold cross-validation test as above, the final recognition rate is 93.9%. In Fig. 15, we
show an example of the outcome of the proposed system for the signs “car” and “lousy”. Their
corresponding tree structure are shown in Fig.16.
These results suggest that the tree structures recognition approach presented in this paper is
appropriate to represent and recognize ASL signs even when these are signed by different
people. Two examples of such tree structure are shown in Fig. 16. When we recognize the
handshape in a sequence as “3,” we need to further subdivide the classifier into several sub-
sections, as shown in Fig.16(a). If the motion category is “left” and the POA is region 1, the
ASL concept is “car.” If the motion class is “right” or “right-down” and the POA is region 0
(“none”), the ASL concept is “lousy.” Similarly, when we recognize the handshape as “W,”
we follow the tree sub-structures in Fig.16(b). In this case, if the motion category is “tapping”
or “none” and the POA is region 5 or 6, the concept is “water.” But, if the motion is a “circle”
and the POA is region 0, the recognized concept is “Wednesday.”
It is important to note that the efficiency of this tree structure does not diminish when the
number of concepts (signs) increases. This is in contrast to other approaches, as in hidden
Markov models, neural networks and discriminant analysis. This is an important property,
which should allow us to move from small vocabularies to large ones in the near future.
We also note that since in the Purdue database there are only two concepts which are associated
with handshape “3,” we can simplify the tree descriptors to that shown in Fig. 17(a), where we
only use the motion to decide the concept. If the motion is “left,” the ASL concept is “car”,
otherwise “lousy.” A similar simplification is possible for the “water” and “Wednesday” signs
as illustrated in Fig. 17(b). These simplifications are important, because they make the system
more robust to signing variations. Note that native signers may very well be using a similar
simplification approach. This then leads to different ways to sign the same ASL concept – not
because they are different signs, but because the feature that was left out from the representation
is now free to vary without affecting the meaning of the sign. Additional simplifications couldDing and Martinez Page 19
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
be extracted by means of discriminant analysis algorithms, for which stable algorithm can be
defined (24). However, if a new sign is learned that needs to incorporate the feature we had
eliminated, then such variations are no longer possible and the original representation has to
be recovered.
Our last experiment is intended to test the algorithm's ability to recognize new (unseen,
untrained) signs, which is one of the main advantages of the proposed approach. For this
experiment, we use the same cross validation method and the same dataset of 10 subjects, 19
handshapes and 38 signs as in the previous experiments. However, in testing we include one
more sign: “King,” for each of the subject. What we need to do is to add the configuration of
the sign “King” (handshape “K,” motion “right” and “down,” and POA “0”) into the tree
structure. Fig. 18 shows how the tree structure under handshape “K” is updated. Note that there
is no need to change the rest of the tree structure.
The recognition rate of the new signs “King” is 89.5% and the recognition rate of the whole
vocabulary including the new signs “King” is 93.5%. This shows how the proposed algorithm
is able to recognize new ASL signs with a single adjustment of the tree structure.
5 Conclusions
To successfully represent ASL signs, one needs to be able to recover their 3D position,
handshape and motion. In this paper we have presented a set of algorithms specifically designed
to accomplish this. Since in ASL, self-occlusions and imprecise detections are common, we
have presented extensions of the structure-from-motion and resection algorithms that
appropriately resolve these issues. We have also introduced the use of a face detector to identify
the place of articulation of the sign. These components together complete the representation
of a sign and allow us to uniquely identify signs that only diverge in one of these three variables.
We have then developed specific algorithm for the recognition of new signs, and we have
introduced a tree-based classifier that can be trained with video sequences or simple dictionary-
like instructions. Experimental results using a database of hard to distinguish signs
demonstrated the robustness of the proposed algorithms.
We have also noted that the learning system defined in this contribution – the tree structure –
does not limit the number of concepts learned, as hidden Markov models or other approaches
would. This should facilitate the extension of the proposed algorithm to do recognition in large
vocabularies. From this, we will be able to move to recognition in context, i.e., sentences.
However, new fundamental results will be needed to disambiguate signs from context, since
the same sign can be articulated differently depending on the contents of its sentence.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Ronnie Wilbur for her wonderful descriptions of the inner-workings of ASL. This research was
supported in part by grant R01-DC-005241 from the National Institutes of Health and grant IIS-07-13055 from the
National Science Foundation.
This research was supported in part by a grant from the National Institutes of Health and a grant from the National
Science Foundation.
References
1. von Agris U, Schneider D, Zieren J, Kraiss K. Rapid Signer Adaptation for Isolated Sign Language
Recognition. Proc IEEE Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Jun;2006 :159–159.
2. Aran O, Ari I, Benoit A, Carrillo AH, Fanard FX, Campr P, Akarun L, Caplier A, Rombaut M, Sankur
B. Sign Language Tutoring Tool. Report in ENTERFACE Workshop. 2006Ding and Martinez Page 20
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
3. Arulampalam, MS.; Maskell, S.; Gordon, N.; Clapp, T. A Tutorial on Particle Filters for Online
Nonlinear/Non-Gaussian Bayesian Tracking. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing; Proc. IEEE
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2008; Feb. 2002
4. Cui Y, Weng J. Appearance-Based Hand Sign Recognition from Intensity Image Sequences. Computer
Vision Image Understanding 2000;78(2):157–176.
5. Brashear, H.; Henderson, V.; Park, KH.; Hamilton, H.; Lee, S.; Starner, T. American Sign Language
Recognition in Game Development for Deaf Children. Proc Conf on ACM SIGACCESS on Computers
and Accessibility; 2006.
6. Brentari, D. A prosodic model of sign language phonology. MIT Press; 2000.
7. Dennis JE, Schnabel RB. Numerical Methods for Unconstrained Optimization and Nonlinear Equations
(Classics in Applied Mathematics). Society for Industrial Mathematics. 1987
8. Ding, L.; Martinez, AM. Three-Dimensional Shape and Motion Reconstruction for the Analysis of
American Sign Language. Proc the 2nd IEEE Workshop on Vision for Human Computer Interaction;
2006.
9. Ding L, Martinez AM. Precise Detailed Detection of Faces and Facial Features. Proc IEEE Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2008
10. Emmorey, K.; Reilly, J., editors. Language, gesture, and space. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum;
1999.
11. Fang G, Gao W. A SRN/HMM System for Signer-independent Continuous Sign Language
Recognition. Proc IEEE Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition. 2002
12. Gorce ML, Paragios N, Fleet DJ. Model-Based Hand Tracking with Texture, Shading and Self-
occlusions. Proc IEEE Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2008
13. Grunert JA. Das Pothenotische Problem in erweiterter Gestalt nebst Über seine Anwendungen in der
Geodäsie. Grunerts Archiv für Mathematik und Physik, Band 1 1841:238–248.
14. Haralick RM, Lee C, Ottenberg K, Nolle M. Review and Analysis of Solutions of the Three Point
Perspective Pose Estimation Problem. International Journal of Computer Vision 1994;13(3):331–
356.
15. Hartley, R.; Zisserman, A. Multiple View Geometry in Computer Vision. Cambridge University
Press; 2003.
16. Hernandez-Rebollar JL, Kyriakopoulos N, Lindeman RW. A New Instrumented Approach for
Translating American Sign Language into Sound and Text. Proc IEEE Automatic Face and Gesture
Recognition. 2004
17. Holden EJ, Owens R. Visual Sign Language Recognition. Proc Int'l Workshop Theoretical
Foundations of Computer Vision 2000:270–287.
18. Imagawa K, Matsuo H, Taniguchi Ri, Arita D, Lu S, Igi S. Recognition of Local Features for Camera-
Based Sign Language Recognition System. Proc IEEE Pattern Recognition 2000;4:849–853.
19. Jacobs DW. Linear Fitting with Missing Data for Structure-from-Motion. Computer Vision and Image
Understanding 2001;82(1):57–81.
20. Jia H, Martinez AM. Low-Rank Matrix Fitting Based on Subspace Perturbation Analysis with
Applications to Structure from Motion. IEEE Transon Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
May;2009 31(No. 2):841–854.
21. Liang RH, Ouhyoung M. A Real-Time Continuous Gesture Recognition System for Sign Language.
Proc IEEE Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition 1998:558–565.
22. Lichtenauer J, Hendriks E, Reinders M. Sign Language Recognition by Combining Statistical DTW
and Independent Classification. IEEE Trans Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 2008;30(11):
2040–2046.
23. Martinez, AM.; Wilbur, RB.; Shay, R.; Kak, AC. The Purdue ASL Database for the Recognition of
American Sign Language. Proc. IEEE Multimodal Interfaces; Pittsburgh (PA). Nov. 2002
24. Martinez AM, Zhu M. Where Are Linear Feature Extraction Methods Applicable? IEEE Trans Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence 2005;27(12):1934–1944.
25. Messing, MS.; Campbell, R. Gesture, speech, and sign. Oxford University Press; 1999.Ding and Martinez Page 21
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
26. Nayak S, Sarkar S, Loeding B. Distribution-based dimensionality reduction applied to articulated
motion recognition. IEEE Trans Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence May;2009 31(No. 2):
795–810.
27. Ong SCW, Ranganath S. Automatic Sign Language Analysis: A Survey and the Future beyond Lexical
Meaning. IEEE Trans on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 2005;27(6)
28. Sagawa H, Takeuchi M. A Method for Recognizing a Sequence of Sign Language Words Represented
in a Japanese Sign Language Sentence. Proc IEEE Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition
2000:434–439.
29. Starner T, Pentland A. Real-Time American Sign Language Recognition Using Desk and Wearable
Computer Based Video. IEEE Trans Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 1998;20(12)
30. Stoke, WC. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education. Vol. 10. Oxford University Press; 2005.
Sign Language Structure: An Outline of the Visual Communication Systems of the American Deaf.
31. Stoke, WC.; Casterline, DC.; Croneberg, CG. A Dictionary of American Sign Language on Linguistic
Principales. Linstok Press; 1976.
32. Su MC. A Fuzzy Rule-Based Approach to Spatio-Temporal Hand Gesture Recognition. IEEE Trans
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C: Applications and Reviews May;2000 30(2):276–281.
33. Tamura S, Kawasaki S. Recognition of Sign Language Motion Images. Pattern Recognition 1988;21
(4):343–353.
34. Tanibata N, Shimada N, Shirai Y. Extraction of Hand Features for Recognition of Sign Language
Words. Proc International Conf Vision Interface 2002:391–398.
35. Vamplew P, Adams A. Recognition of Sign Language Gestures Using Neural Networks.
Neuropsychological Trends April;2007 (1):31–41.
36. Vogler, C. PhD thesis. Univ of Pennsylvania; 2003. American Sign Language Recognition: Reducing
the Complexity of the Task with Phoneme-Based Modeling and Parallel Hidden Markov Models.
37. Wang J, Athitsos V, Sclaroff S, Betke M. Detecting Objects of Variable Shape Structure With Hidden
State Shape Models. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 2008;30(3):
477–492. [PubMed: 18195441]
38. Wilbur, RB. American Sign Language: Linguistic and applied dimensions. Second. Boston: Little,
Brown; 1987.
39. Wilbur RB, Martinez AM. Physical Correlates of Prosodic Structure in American Sign Language.
Chicago Linguistic Society 2002;38
40. Kuhn N, Ciciliani TA, Wilbur RB. Phonological parameters in Croatian Sign Language. IEEE Trans
Pattern Analysis Machine Intelligence 2006;9(No. 1-2):33–70.
41. Yang M, Ahuja N, Tabb M. Extraction of 2D Motion Trajectories and Its Application to Hand Gesture
Recognition. IEEE Trans Pattern Analysis Machine Intelligence Aug;2002 24(8):1061–1074.
42. Yang, R.; Sarkar, S.; Loeding, B. Enhanced Level Building Algorithm for the Movement Epenthesis
Problem in Sign Language Recognition. Proc IEEE Conf on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition; 2007.
43. Ye, J.; Yao, H.; Jiang, F. Based on HMM and SVM Multilayer Architecture Classifier for Chinese
Sign Language Recognition with Large Vocabulary. Proc IEEE International Conference on Image
and Graphics; 2004.
44. Zhu M, Martinez AM. Pruning Noisy Bases in Discriminant Analysis. IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks 2008;19(1):148–157. [PubMed: 18269946]Ding and Martinez Page 22
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 1.
Example signs with identical handshape, different motion (a-b); same motion, different
handshape (c-d); same motion, same handshape, different place of articulation (e-f). The
meaning of these signs are: (a) search, (b) drink, (c) family, (d) class, (e) onion, and (f) apple.Ding and Martinez Page 23
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 2.
(a) Shown here are two example images with handshape “1” and the 3D reconstruction of the
shape obtained with the proposed algorithm. Note that the two images correspond to two
different signs sharing the same handshape. In (b-j) we show additional example images and
corresponding 3D reconstruction for the following handshapes: “3,” “5,” “8,” “F,” “K,” “A,”
“I,” “L” and “W.”Ding and Martinez Page 24
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 3.
Shown here are the error curves corresponding to the solution given by Grunert's algorithm
and the approach presented in this section.Ding and Martinez Page 25
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 4.
Face detection examples.Ding and Martinez Page 26
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 5.
Shown here are the results of modelling the ASL concepts “forever” and “library.” In each
sign, six example frames are shown. The 3D handshapes recovered by the proposed algorithm
are shown in their 3D position and orientation with regard to the face coordinate system. This
defines the place of articulation of the sign. The images with the corresponding reprojection
of the reconstructed handshape using the 3D motion parameters recovered on top of the images
are shown below each 3D display. In (a) we show the results corresponding to the ASL concept
“forever.” In (b) we have the results for “library.” (c-d) The 3D trajectory recovered for the
concept “forever” and “library,” respectively. The direction of motions is marked along the
trajectories.Ding and Martinez Page 27
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 6.
An illustration of (a) the joint angles used in our approach, and (b) the angle differences between
fingers.Ding and Martinez Page 28
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 7.
Shown here is an example of the detection of a circular motion. (a) The motion trajectory of
an ASL sign. (b) The 2D projection of the sign trajectory. Shown in red is the detected circular
motion. (c) The Hough transform result.Ding and Martinez Page 29
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 8.
Motion classification examples. The classes for each of the motions are : (a) left, (b) right, (c)
forward, and (d) down.Ding and Martinez Page 30
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 9.
Motion classification from signs including more than one class of movement. The results of
the classification obtained with the propose algorithm are: (a) up– down, (b) forward-backward,
(c) left-right.Ding and Martinez Page 31
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 10.
Two example motions for the ASL signs (a) “legal,” and (b) “forever.”Ding and Martinez Page 32
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 11.
Face template (model) used to specify the eight regions defining the place of articulation (POA)
of a sign.Ding and Martinez Page 33
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 12.
Example results of detecting the place of articulation in a variety of ASL signs. In each example
image, we show the estimated face regions and the recovered handshape. The red dot indicates
the POA found by the algorithm described in this section. The label of this POA is given by
the face region closest to the red dot.Ding and Martinez Page 34
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 13.
Two examples of ASL signs with common handshape but distinct place of articulation. (a) Car,
(b) lousy, (c) water, and (d) Wednesday.Ding and Martinez Page 35
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 14.
Shown here are examples of similar handshapes. Handshapes: (a) “R,” and “U.”Ding and Martinez Page 36
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 15.
(a-b) The modelling results for the ASL signs “car” and “lousy.” In each sign, six example
frames are shown. The 3D handshapes recovered by the proposed algorithm are shown in their
3D position and orientation with regard to the face coordinate system. The images with the
corresponding reprojection of the reconstructed handshape using the 3D motion parameters
recovered on top of the images are shown below each 3D display. (c) The handshape of the
signs: “3.” (d-e) The motions of the signs. (f-g) The POAs of the signs.Ding and Martinez Page 37
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 16.
Shown here are examples of the tree structures generated by the proposed approach for the
ASL signs: (a) “car” and “lousy,” and (b) “water” and “Wednesday.”Ding and Martinez Page 38
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 17.
Shown here are examples of the simplified tree structures for the manual signs: (a) “car” and
“lousy,” and (b) “water” and “Wednesday.”Ding and Martinez Page 39
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 18.
Shown here are examples of the tree structures for the manual signs with handshape “K”: (a)
for the original vocabulary, and (b) for the new vocabulary when a new sign “King.”Ding and Martinez Page 40
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author ManuscriptDing and Martinez Page 41
Table 1
In this table, the first column describes the type of handshape, while the second column specifies the two meanings
the observed in the Purdue database.
Handshapes Signs
1 You Only-one
3 car lousy
5 father tree
8 jerk sick
A daily girl
B house present
C drink search
E East elevator
F fruit cat
I deaf school interview
K see kitchen
L legal library
O none empty-head
R rope Ronnie
U honor hard-of-hearing
V vinegar dive
W water Wednesday
X can apple
Y same forever
Image Vis Comput . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.